Abdel-Maksoud, G. and E. Marcinkowska (2000). "Changes in Some Properties of Aged and Historical Parchment."  21(3): 138-157.
	
Allen, M. (2010). "The Conservation of the Flintshire and Denbighshire Enclosure Awards Including the Treatment of Multi-membrane Parchment Documents." Journal of the Society of Archivists 31(1): 63-72.
	
Axelsson, K. M., et al. (2016). "Degradation of collagen in parchment under the influence of heat-induced oxidation: Preliminary study of changes at macroscopic, microscopic, and molecular levels." Studies in Conservation 61(1): 46-57.
	This paper examines the impact of heat-induced oxidation for new and historical parchment with the purpose of improving diagnostic tools for use in practical parchment conservation. Oxidation was generated by heat aging at 120°C in a dry oven for 24, 48, and 96 hours, respectively. The degradation was assessed on all samples at macrolevel by measuring color changes, at microlevel by measuring the shrinkage temperature as well as by performing a visual assessment of the fibers' morphology and determining the amount of damaged fibers, and finally, at molecular level where amino acid analysis was used to reveal changes in the oxidized collagen. The study shows that the heat-induced oxidation leads to significant color changes, decrease in hydrothermal stability, as well as changes in the amino acid composition. Surprisingly, the results show that the historical parchment is more sensitive towards dry heat oxidation on a molecular level than is the new parchment. Furthermore, for the first time, we can show that physical damage reflected in the morphological characteristics of fibers can be attributed to oxidation by dry heat.

Badea, E., et al. (2011). "Characterisation and evaluation of the environmental impact on historical parchments by differential scanning calorimetry." Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 104(2): 495-506.
	Our recent developments concerning the assessment of parchments deterioration using DSC are reported. Measurements performed on samples in excess water conditions, in static air and gas flow provided qualitative and quantitative information on parchment ageing and deterioration at microscopic and mesoscopic level, when assembly of fibres/fibrils is weakened, partially and eventually completely lost, and at molecular level, when triple helix uncoiling occurs. A damage ranking scale based on a large collection of DSC parameters obtained by investigating artificially aged samples was set up. Deconvolution of the DSC thermal denaturation peaks in excess water enabled evaluating and discriminating stability of parchments with similar damage levels. Further experimental evidences such as softening of the crystalline fraction of collagen, thermal-oxidation and collagen gelatinisation were detected by DSC measurements in gas flow and static air, and related to specific deterioration patterns. DSC measurement of wet samples provided an objective and reliable method for evaluating parchment shrinkage temperature overcoming the limitations of conventional methods.

Badea, E., et al. (2012). "Effects of temperature and relative humidity on fibrillar collagen in parchment: A micro differential scanning calorimetry (micro DSC) study." Polymer Degradation and Stability 97(3): 346-353.
	Micro DSC measurements were used to investigate the synergistic effects of temperature and relative humidity on deterioration of parchment. Samples were obtained by exposing new parchments to various temperature and relative humidity atmospheres for increasing times in controlled test chambers. The impact of this accelerated ageing was assessed by measuring the thermodynamic parameters associated with the thermal denaturation of fibrillar collagen: variation of denaturation temperature, T max, indicated changes in collagen thermal stability, increases of DSC peak half-width, ΔT 1/2, revealed greater thermal heterogeneity and structural disorder, whereas parallel decrease of denaturation enthalpy, ΔH, and DSC peak maximum height, Cpex max, measured the loss of fibrillar structure. Deconvolution of DSC denaturation peaks provided a valuable illustration of both the dynamics and the pattern of the deterioration of fibrillar collagen. Impact of temperature and relative humidity on parchment integrity and stability is discussed in terms of their implications for conservation science. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Badea, E., et al. (2008). Damage assessment of parchments - an innovative multisciplinary approach.
	Parchment is well known for its durability which rests on the collagen supramolecular hierarchical structure characterised by an intimate connectivity between molecules and their organisation in fibrils and fibres. The first objective of our study is to obtain information on deterioration at different structural levels and find out relationship between damage at different levels. Another important objective is to detect the threshold values of parchment's structural and physical-chemical parameters and characterise the damaged stable state and damaged unstable state of parchment. To this end, advanced physical-chemical techniques, such as differential scanning calorimetry, micro hot table method, IR spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy and unilateral nuclear magnetic resonance were employed.

Badea, E., et al. (2008). "Study of deterioration of historical parchments by various thermal analysis techniques complemented by SEM, FTIR, UV-Vis-NIR and unilateral NMR investigations." Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 91(1): 17-27.
	A comprehensive investigation has been made of a set of 14th to 16th-century parchment bookbindings from the Historical Archives of the City of Turin. Advanced physico-chemical techniques, such as thermal analysis (DSC, TG and DTA), spectroscopy (FTIR and UV-Vis-NIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and unilateral nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR-ProFiler) were employed to assess specific deterioration processes occurring at different levels in the hierarchical structure of parchment. Changes in the measured physical and chemical parameter values of parchment due to interaction with the environment were used to identify possible deterioration pathways.

Badea, E., et al. (2012). "Damage ranking of historic parchment: from microscopic studies of fibre structure to collagen denaturation assessment by micro DSC." E-Preservation Science.
	Microscopic assessment of collagen fibre structure and their shrinkage activity was used to quantify the deterioration at a microscopic level for two collections of historic parchments, from the Royal Library of Copenhagen and the State Archives of Florence. The micro Differential Scanning Calorimetry (micro DSC) was used to quantitatively assess the deterioration at the mesoscopic level, through the analysis of fibrillar collagen thermal denaturation. The results enabled us to classify the historic parchments in four categories, i.e. non-damaged, and displaying minor, medium and major damage. The measurement protocols, deterioration parameters and criteria for assigning a parchment to one of the four categories are reported. Such cate-gorisation of deterioration can support improved preventive care and conservation interventions in collections.

Badea, E., et al. (2015). "The use of differential scanning calorimetry to characterise collagen deterioration in parchment." Rossijskij Khimicheskij Zhurnal 59(1): 28-41.
	
Banou, P. and A. Stassinou (2012). "Approaches to the conservation of patriarchal sigillia on parchment from the General State Archives of Greece." Journal of the Institute of Conservation 35(2): 201-218.
	
Barone, L. (2013). "Medieval music manuscript mystery—treatment of an illuminated noted breviary folio." Journal of the Institute of Conservation 36(2): 162-172.
	
Bell, N., et al. (2018). "Assessing the condition of the Domesday Books from the visual to the molecular." Heritage Science 6(1): 50.
	This article presents a collaborative study to determine the condition within volumes of the Great and Little Domesday Book, held in The National Archives, UK. Advances in technology in both biochemical and biophysical analysis have allowed for the first time undetectable sub milligram sampling of the five-volume Great and Little Domesday Books at nine sites in total. Visual analysis was followed by microscopic fibre assessment, hydrothermal stability (shrinkage activity), amino acid analysis and microfocus X-ray diffraction. Based on the visual examination of 887 leaves in all five volumes of the Domesday Book, 587 leaves or 66% of the leaves exhibit a degree of surface gelatinisation due in part to humidification and pressing practices carried out as part of the many re-binding campaigns carried out over the centuries. Microfibre assessment indicated the percentage of damaged fibres detected varies from 56 to 100% in the samples taken, a correlation between the sum of oxidative sensitive amino acids and the observed damage of fibres was obtained. More than 1000 X-ray diffraction patterns collected showed a significant variation in amount of visible fibrillar collagen within each sample scan. Micro analysis performed here on corium collagen, means the results represent an average of the cross section of the structure of which the surface constitutes the smallest part. As the major part of damage is on the surface of the parchment leaves, the condition is likely to be worse than that reflected by the analytical results shown here. This evidence therefore prompted a re-think of the preservation protocols required to extend the usable life of the Domesday Book volumes. To this end, the preservation environment for the volumes is maintained at 40–45% relative humidity (RH) significantly lower than the recommended parameter of 55% RH.

Beltran de Guevara, M. and P. Garside (2013). "The conservation of the burnt Cotton Collection." Journal of the Institute of Conservation 36(2): 145-161.
	
Beöthy-Kozocsa, I., et al. (1990). "Parchment codex restoration using parchment and cellulose fibre pulp."
	
Bicchieri, M., et al. (2019). "Microscopic observations of paper and parchment: the archaeology of small objects." Heritage Science 7(1): 47.
	The study of micro-objects, both inorganic and organic, which can be found associated to parchment or cellulose fibres of books and documents, or in the inks and the dirt, accumulated over the centuries between the pages, can unravel important information on the manufacture of the ancient documents, on their past vicissitudes or on the causes of aging and deterioration of the materials they contain. The results of a critical observation of micrometric objects and structures with a diagnostic or archaeological significance have in some cases been surprising. Apart from the curiosity that certain findings may or may not raise, what needs to be discussed is the fact that some chemical components, usually attributed to the manufacture of materials or the inks may instead have a particular origin and nature, and therefore lead, if not properly highlighted, to some erroneous diagnostics. Examples are given where the information obtained by means of scanning electron microscope imaging and Raman microscopy were coupled with dispersive X-ray microanalysis and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy.

Bicchieri, M., et al. (2008). "Inside the parchment." 9th International Conference on NDT of Art.
	
Bicchieri, M., et al. (2018). "New results in Dead Sea Scrolls non-destructive characterisation. Evidence of different parchment manufacture in the fragments from Reed collection." Journal of Cultural Heritage 32: 22-29.
	This work presents the non-destructive spectroscopic characterisation of original Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS) parchment fragments from Ronald Reed collection. The fragments are of paramount importance because they have never been subjected to any treatment of preservation and restoration, this allows to investigate the manufacturing method of real original Jewish parchments. The manufacture of “sacred” Jewish parchments, in fact, is traditionally supposed to use a superficial tannin treatment. To study the DSS fragments, it was necessary both to analyse mock-up samples, especially manufactured in order to reproduce ancient Oriental Jewish ritual parchments, and to compare the results with those obtained in the analysis of modern and ancient Western Jewish ritual parchments, in order to test the effectiveness of the selected spectroscopic techniques. Traditionally, the main difference between Oriental and Western traditional parchment preparation consisted in the dehairing method: enzymatic for Oriental and lime-based for Western. Moreover, a finishing treatment with tannin was supposed to be applied on ritual Jewish parchments. The need of reference samples derives from the knowledge that each parchment preparation, treatment and degradation can induce structural modifications that affect the spectral features. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy by Attenuated Total Reflection (ATR-FTIR), FT-Raman and m-Raman were used in this study. The experimental results allowed us to recognise, with different sensitivity, the presence of tannin by using m-Raman and IR spectroscopies and to prove that not all the archaeological samples were manufactured in the same way with vegetal extracts. Many salts (tschermigite, dolomite, calcite, gypsum and iron carbonate) were found on the surface of DSS fragments. They can derive from the degradation processes and storage environment before the discovery or from the manufacture. Moreover, the different sensitivities and instrumental characteristics of the used techniques permitted us to establish an analytical protocol, useful for further studies of similar materials.

Budrugeac, P. (2009). "Application of model-free and multivariate non-linear regression methods for evaluation of the thermo-oxidative endurance of a recent manufactured parchment." Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 97(2): 443-451.
	
Budrugeac, P. and L. Miu (2008). "Effect of accelerated thermal ageing on the thermal behaviour of the recently made parchments." Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 94(2): 335-342.
	To reveal the fire injuring of parchment, the changes in the thermal behaviour of some goat parchments, obtained from skins originating from different animals, as a result of thermal aging were determined by thermal analysis methods (DSC; simultaneous TG/DTG, DSC; micro hot table (MHT)). Thermal aging of parchments was revealed to bring about the decrease in shrinkage temperature, absolute value of enthalpy of denaturation in water and some changes in non-isothermal parameters characteristic for dehydration process in static air atmosphere.

Budrugeac, P., et al. (2004). "Identification of collagen-based materials that are supports of cultural and historical objects." Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 77(3): 975-985.
	The TG, DTG, DTA methods were used for investigation of the thermal degradation in static air atmosphere of some collagen-based materials (some sorts of collagen, recent manufactured parchments and tanned leathers, patrimonial (historical) leathers). At the progressive heating, all investigated materials exhibit two main successive processes, associated with the dehydration and thermo-oxidative degradation. The patrimonial leathers were divided in two groups, namely: a group containing the majority of the analyzed materials, for which the rates of the thermo-oxidation process are substantially lower than those corresponding to the recent manufactured leathers, and a group for which the rates of thermo-oxidation process are closed to those corresponding to the recent manufactured leathers. Consequently, if by the thermal analysis in air atmosphere of a leather sample, a value of the rate of the thermo-oxidation process smaller than that corresponding to the recent manufactured leathers is obtained, then the analyzed leather is a patrimonial one. The reciprocal statement of this qualitative criterion for distinction between recent manufactured leather and patrimonial leather is not valid. The DSC analyses of collagen-based materials were performed in air (DSC(air)) and in water (DSC(water)). The denaturation process takes place at lower temperatures in water than in air. Unlike recent manufactured leathers and parchments, each patrimonial leather exhibits on DSC(water) plot 2-4 peaks. Consequently, the number of peaks from DSC(water) curve could be another qualitative criterion for distinction between a recently manufactured leather and a patrimonial leather.

Caldararo, N. and A. C. Kahle (2017). "Examination and Treatment of a Portolan Chart." Journal of the Society of Leather Technologists and Chemists 101(2): 59-65.
	
Campagnolo, A., et al. (2016). Cultural heritage destruction : experiments with parchment and multispectral imaging. Digital Classics Outside the Echo-Chamber: Teaching, Knowledge Exchange & Public Engagement: 121-146.
	
Cappa, F., et al. (2020). "Studies on the effects of mixed light-thermal ageing on parchment by vibrational spectroscopy and micro hot table method." Heritage Science 8(1): 15.
	The damaging effects of mixed light-thermal ageing on parchment were studied by exposing mock-ups to artificial light (162 W/m2 irradiance) at controlled temperature and relative humidity (52 °C, 30% RH) for up to 748 h, with testing being made during this time incrementally. The physical–chemical changes (deterioration) resulting from these conditions were analysed by applying FTIR-ATR and Raman spectroscopy, colorimetric measurements and MHT. The deterioration found includes the formation of collagen-destabilised intermediate states which then progressively convert to disorganised structures, e.g. pregelatinised collagen and gelatin. The process is characterized by molecular changes of collagen associated with its photo-oxidation. These are shown by changes in the position and intensity of the main FTIR absorption bands of collagen, namely those of Amide I, Amide II, and Amide III, as well as by the occurrence and the increase of a shoulder at 1740 cm−1. The shrinking activity of the collagen fibres in the parchment mock-ups was measured by the micro-hot-table (MHT) method, which revealed the presence of multiple collagen populations with distinct thermal stabilities and confirmed the deterioration pattern suggested by the molecular changes.

Cappa, F., et al. (2020). "Studies on the effect of dry-heat ageing on parchment deterioration by vibrational spectroscopy and micro hot table method." Polymer Degradation and Stability 182: 109375.
	
Carsote, C., et al. (2014). "Characterization of a Byzantine manuscript by infrared spectroscopy and thermal analysis." Revue Roumaine de Chimie 2014: 429-436.
	
Carvalho, I., et al. (2018). "Colour identification, degradation processes and findings in a fifteenth-century Book of Hours: the case study of Cofre n.º 31 from Mafra National Palace." Heritage Science 6(1): 9.
	This paper presents the work done as part of a master dissertation on Conservation and Restoration at the Faculty of Sciences and Technology, Nova University of Lisbon. The “Cofre n.º 31” is a French fifteenth century Book of Hours from the Library of the National Palace of Mafra, Portugal. This prayer book, composed by illuminations and devotional texts, was in bad condition due mainly to the rebinding done between eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. According to the assessment of the state of conservation, the main damages observed in the text block and binding were: volume distortion, loose and deformed gatherings, distortion and cockling of folios, and damages in the illuminations. The pigments palette was identified by µ-EDXRF, FORS, µ-Raman and µ-FTIR, which is consistent with the materials used in the fifteenth century. Nevertheless, some particular application techniques such as mixtures and overlays were found, namely in the red colours and specifically in the metallic leaves. Some of these colours also show specific degradation: darkening of the mixture of minium and vermillion; silver tarnishing with strong migration into the parchment support, especially when associated with minium; detachment of azurite, lead white and its mixtures, such as flesh tones and light colours. The main deterioration processes associated to silver and pigments can be assigned to their reactions with humidity and air pollutants, to the grain size of the pigments and to mechanical factors related to the book binding and its use. The presence of different pigments application techniques in different groups of folios lead us to conclude for the existence of a pigments palette with variations, and finally, three different illuminators and two different techniques, confirming the proposals of art history studies.

Cicero, C., et al. (2019). "Integrated adiabatic scanning calorimetry, light transmission and imaging analysis of collagen deterioration in parchment." Thermochimica Acta 676: 263-270.
	
Ciglanská, M., et al. (2014). "The influence of pollutants on accelerated ageing of parchment with iron gall inks." Journal of Cultural Heritage 15(4): 373-381.
	Moist heat (100°C in closed vessels) and pollutants (SO2 or NOx, 100°C) techniques of accelerated ageing were applied in stability investigation of iron gall inks on parchment. The measured characteristics on parchment samples coated with inks (made of iron(II) sulfate and gallic acid or tannic acid in various ratios) reflected their chemical, optical and spectroscopic attributes. Decrease of surface pH values was measured for all samples, especially after ageing with SO2. The results obtained, comparing the non-aged samples with those aged upon heat and pollutants, revealed the decrease of lightness L* and the increase of chromatic coordinate b* for all six ink layers. These differences in b* were dominantly reflected in values of total color difference (ΔEab*, CIE L*a*b*). The variations in UV/VIS reflectance spectra and ΔEab* evidenced the considerable damage of inks exposed to accelerated ageing, especially for inks prepared with excess of acid to iron. FTIR spectroscopic measurements of parchment showed that accelerated ageing procedures caused changes in structure and arrangement of collagen, and the formation of oxidation products in parchment during the accelerated ageing was stimulated by presence of inks. EPR spectra of parchment coated with inks showed the paramagnetic signals of various Fe(III) species ions in different coordination.

Comfort, D. (2011). Aging of cultural heritage materials: a physico-chemical approach to conservation science. Studies on paper, parchement, pigments and dyes.
	
Cucos, A., et al. (2014). "DMA and DSC studies of accelerated aged parchment and vegetable-tanned leather samples." Thermochimica Acta 583: 86-93.
	The aim and the novelty of this work was the use of both dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), in water and in dry state, for the investigation of the effects of temperature and relative humidity on degradation of recently manufactured parchments and vegetable-tanned leathers. The materials were subjected to accelerated ageing under action of heat and moisture for progressively increasing time lengths. The studies have proved that accelerated ageing causes a progressive decrease of the temperature of denaturation in water excess, but has no or minor effect on that in dry state. Also, under same ageing conditions parchments undergo a greater degree of deterioration than leathers, as evidenced by a more dramatic change in the DSC peaks (in water) and in the shrinkage curves (DMA). The results can be interpreted as a partial gelatinization occurring in the thermal conditions used for accelerated ageing. The paper presents the advantage of using both techniques, namely that DSC results can assist in interpretation of the DMA curves and that the good correlation of denaturation temperatures obtained by DSC and DMA ascertain these values. Such studies can be useful for understanding the processes that take place on natural ageing of historical parchments and leathers, as well as for establishing proper conditions of their storage.

Della Gatta, G., et al. (2005). "Assessment of damage in old parchments by DSC and SEM." Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 82: 637-649.
	
DernovŠKovÁ, J., et al. (1995). "An Investigation of the Hygroscopicity of Parchment Subjected to Different Treatments."  16(1): 31-44.
	
Dolgin, B., et al. (2007). "Non-destructive assessment of parchment deterioration by optical methods." Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 388(8): 1885-1896.
	A non-destructive and non-invasive method for quantitative characterization of parchment deterioration, based on spectral measurements, is proposed. Deterioration due to both natural aging (ancient parchments) and artificial aging (achieved by means of controlled UV irradiation and temperature treatment) was investigated. The effect of aging on parchment native fluorescence was correlated with its deterioration condition. Aging causes fluorescence intensity drop, spectral shift of the main peak, and an overall change in the fluorescence spectral features. Digital color imaging analysis based on visible reflectance from the parchment surface was also applied, and the correspondent color components (RGB) were successively correlated with the state of parchment deterioration/aging. The fluorescence and color imaging data were validated by analysis of historical parchments, aged between 50 and 2000 years and covering a large variety of states of deterioration. The samples were independently assessed by traditional microscopy methods. We conclude that the proposed optical method qualifies well as a non-destructive tool for rapid assessment of the stage of parchment deterioration.

Dolgin, B., et al. (2009). "Application of synchronous fluorescence to parchment characterization." Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 395(7): 2151-2159.
	A nondestructive method for quantitative parchment characterization and sensitive indication of its deterioration stage was developed. Synchronous fluorescence (SF) measurements were applied for the first time to parchment samples. The method provides detailed spectral features, which are useful for parchment characterization. The discrimination of parchment samples into groups (modern, historical, and artificially aged) was successfully performed. The SF spectra could be resolved into specific fluorophores, which were related to the parchment condition. The spectral data indicate a continuous change in the collagen-to-gelatin ratio during the aging process. Depth-resolved synchronous fluorescence spectra were also measured. The data indicate that parchments possess a layered structure, and the dominant fluorophore in the upper layer is different from those in the lower layers. Layer-resolved profiling allows for quantifying the contribution of each fluorophore in each given layer. This way, significant differences between modern, artificially aged, and historical samples can be observed.

Dolgin, B., et al. (2009). "A complex analytical method for parchment characterization." Reviews in Analytical Chemistry 28(3-4): 151-307.
	Parchments are interesting archeological objects. A wide variety of modern analytical techniques have been applied in order to get better insight on parchment preservation stage as well as to contribute to their conservation and restoration. However, no practical method to help the museum workers and laboratory experts in these routine jobs exists. Several requirements have to be satisfied to obtain an appropriate procedure capable of parchment characterization as an entire analytical object. Due to the unique character of common archeological objects, non-destructive techniques or those requiring no (or only minimal) sampling, are preferred. The second problem in this method development deals with the nature of objects under the study. Archeological objects (and parchment particularly) regularly have complex shapes and structures and their origin is rarely known, and they can be found in various states of conservation. Their degree of deterioration can modify the che mical and the physical composition mainly of the surface layers, which are directly accessible to analysis. However, the information obtainable from deeper layers can sometimes be more helpful. Therefore, an application of a single analytical technique to describe parchment conditions often is not advantageous and a special experimental approach, which combines several examination techniques and chemical analysis should be favored. In this context, an assortment of five analytical techniques (synchronous fluorescence, laser induced breakdown spectroscopy, visual color imaging, characterization using high voltage application and near infrared analysis) as well as every technique alone represents one of the best choices, since it combines simplicity, good analytical performance and robustness, non- destructiveness and non-invasiveness. The aim of this work was to develop a guide procedure for characterizing archeological objects using complex nondestructive analytical methodology. Using this guide, the entire parchment analysis can be performed very fast in situ and archeological items can be identified in real time during an on-line data collection. Furthermore, it allows several constituents of interest to be measured simultaneously leading to accurate and objective identification of authentic items.

Dolgin, B., et al. (2006). "Use of LIBS for rapid characterization of parchment." Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 386(5): 1535-1541.
	Parchment from different sources has been analyzed by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) for determination of Ca, Na, K, Mg, Fe, Cu, and Mn. The LIBS results were compared with results from inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP) and good correlation was obtained. Rapid distinction between modern and historical samples was achieved by discriminant analysis of the LIBS data. Animal type recognition was also possible on the basis of Mg/Cu emission peak ratio and Mg depth profiling.

Down, J. L., et al. (2002). "Analysis of the Archimedes Palimpsest." Studies in Conservation 47(sup3): 52-58.
	
Duran, A., et al. (2014). "Analysis of a royal 15th century illuminated parchment using a portable XRF–XRD system and micro-invasive techniques." Journal of archaeological science 45: 52-58.
	
Edwards, H. G. M. and F. R. Perez (2004). "Application of Fourier transform Raman spectroscopy to the characterization of parchment and vellum. II—Effect of biodeterioration and chemical deterioration on spectral interpretation." Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 35(8): 754-760.
	
Garside, P. and C. Dekeyser (2022). "Investigating the Properties of Folded Parchment – A Preliminary Study."  43(1-2): 111-125.
	
Ghioni, C., et al. (2005). "Evidence of a distinct lipid fraction in historical parchments: a potential role in degradation?" Journal of Lipid Research 46(12): 2726-2734.
	
Giacometti, A., et al. (2012). Cultural Heritage Destruction: Documenting Parchment Degradation via Multispectral Imaging.
	
Gonzalez, L. and T. Wess (2008). "Use of Attenuated Total Reflection–Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy to Measure Collagen Degradation in Historical Parchments." Applied Spectroscopy 62: 1108-1114.
	
Hepworth, P. and M. Michelozzi (2004). "Conservation of two Coptic parchment manuscript fragments." The Paper Conservator 28(1): 63-73.
	
Kennedy, C. J. and T. J. Wess (2006). "Parchment degradation analysed by X-ray diffraction." Bio-and Material Cultures at Qumran: 215.
	
Kennedy, C. J. and T. J. Wess (2006). The use of X-ray scattering to analyse parchment structure and degradation. Physical Techniques in the Study of Art, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage. D. Bradley and D. Creagh, Elsevier. 1: 151-172.
	Parchment is a collagen-based, historically important biomaterials that contains many layers of information, from text written on the surface, to the structure of the material itself. The degradation of historical parchments is often attributed to inappropriate storage conditions, although other factors may also accelerate the decay of collagen within the parchment, such as harsh cleaning or manufacturing techniques that involved extreme variations in pH or mechanical treatment. X-ray diffraction at small and wide angles is an ideal tool for analysing the structure of the collagen, which gives the parchment its strength and durability over time. This chapter describes how small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), in conjunction with sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and thermal techniques, and wide angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) can give a detailed account of the collagen structure within the parchment and indicate any deterioration brought about by laser-cleaning.

Kern, M. S., et al. (2018). "Accelerated Ageing of Parchment: Investigation of a Photo Catalysed, Low-Heat Approach."  39(1): 33-70.
	
Kireyeva, V. (1999). "Examination of Parchment in Byzantine Manuscripts."  20(1): 39-47.
	
Kraková, L., et al. (2012). "A multiphasic approach for investigation of the microbial diversity and its biodegradative abilities in historical paper and parchment documents." International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation 70: 117-125.
	The microbial diversity of different kinds of stains present on the surface of 14 historical documents (nine parchments and five paper letters) was evaluated through a combination of cultural and molecular methods. The samples were recovered using adhesive tape and swabs and were afterwards treated in two different ways: (1) direct inoculation on agar plates; or (2) suspension in physiological solution and plating in specific plates for the growth of bacteria and fungi. The isolated microorganisms, before identification, were selected by two different PCR-based methods – f-ITS and f-CBH, for bacteria and fungi, respectively. The f-ITS method is based on the amplification of the internal transcribed sequence between the bacterial 16S and 23S rDNA. The f-CBH method is a new molecular selection tool oriented to the fungal cellobiohydrolase gene. Both PCR selection methods produced typical profiles, which clustered the isolates in order to reduce them for subsequent sequencing identification through the amplification of the fungal 28S rRNA and the bacterial 16S rRNA genes. The cellulolytic and proteolytic abilities were screened through the use of three plate assays, the Ostazin Brilliant Red H-3B (OBR-HEC), milk agar, and gelatin agar. Massilia timonae, Lysobacter dokdonensis, and strains belonging to the genus Bacillus sp., Microbacterium sp., and Curtobacterium sp. with different fungal members such as Aspergillus fumigatus, Penicillium commune, Mucor spinosus, and Phoma herbarum (all recovered from paper) displayed both biodegradative activities. The parchment isolates with a marked proteolytic activity were Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Pseudomonas oryzihabitans, Virgibacillus sp., Micromonospora sp., and again members of the fungal genera Penicillium, Mucor, and Phoma.

Krzemień, L., et al. (2020). "Risk of climate-induced damage in historic parchment." Heritage Science 8(1): 17.
	Moisture adsorption and related dimensional change were examined in several samples of historic and contemporary parchment. The tensile behaviour was determined for contemporary parchment and two selected historic materials. The moisture-related data for most parchments are close to the contemporary material while aging and past treatments may lower adsorption of moisture and, in consequence, the dimensional change induced by changes in the moisture content. Contemporary parchment exhibited larger water vapour adsorption and moisture-related response compared to most historic materials and, therefore, can be regarded as the worst-case material in terms of the climate-induced risks to parchment. Tensile parameters of parchment varied significantly with increasing relative humidity (RH). Elasticity modulus declined from on average 1200 to 400 MPa and strain at failure doubled when RH increased from 30 to 85%. Parchment’s critical strain at which permanent deformation occurred decreased dramatically with increasing RH reaching zero at 80%. Irreversible curling produced by variations in RH to which flat parchment specimens were subjected were measured by scanning the specimen surface with the use of a laser triangulation sensor. The degree of curling was expressed quantitatively as standard deviation of local curvatures in the parchment sheet. The study opens a perspective of using the relationship between degree of curling and magnitude of RH variations to derive categories of risk to parchment from indoor climate variations, under the condition that quantitative loss of aesthetical/display value of parchment objects resulting from increased curling is agreed. Historical parchment documents generally demonstrating considerable curling engendered by uncontrolled storage conditions in the past are not vulnerable to further distortion when subjected to variations in RH even of considerable magnitude.

Larsen, R. and P. D.V (2005). Damage assessment of parchment: complexity and relations at different structural levels.
	
Latour, G. and L. Robinet (2019). "La microscopie optique tridimensionnelle, de l'imagerie biomédicale à la caractérisation des objets du patrimoine." Instrumentation portable: quels enjeux pour l’archéométrie?
	
Latour, G., et al. (2016). "Correlative nonlinear optical microscopy and infrared nanoscopy reveals collagen degradation in altered parchments." Scientific Reports 6(1): 26344.
	This paper presents the correlative imaging of collagen denaturation by nonlinear optical microscopy (NLO) and nanoscale infrared (IR) spectroscopy to obtain morphological and chemical information at different length scales. Such multiscale correlated measurements are applied to the investigation of ancient parchments, which are mainly composed of dermal fibrillar collagen. The main issue is to characterize gelatinization, the ultimate and irreversible alteration corresponding to collagen denaturation to gelatin, which may also occur in biological tissues. Key information about collagen and gelatin signatures is obtained in parchments and assessed by characterizing the denaturation of pure collagen reference samples. A new absorbing band is observed near the amide I band in the IR spectra, correlated to the onset of fluorescence signals in NLO images. Meanwhile, a strong decrease is observed in Second Harmonic signals, which are a structural probe of the fibrillar organization of the collagen at the micrometer scale. NLO microscopy therefore appears as a powerful tool to reveal collagen degradation in a non-invasive way. It should provide a relevant method to assess or monitor the condition of collagen-based materials in museum and archival collections and opens avenues for a broad range of applications regarding this widespread biological material.

Lungu, I. B., et al. (2023) Physical Chemical Investigation of Gamma-Irradiated Parchment for Preservation of Cultural Heritage. Polymers 15,  DOI: 10.3390/polym15041034
	The historical artefacts of parchment are prone to degradation if the storage conditions are improper due to the collagen structure having a limited stability under physical, chemical, and biological agent attacks. The parchment structure is difficult to characterize due to the variety of manufacturing traditions (eastern/western), intrinsic variability of skins (i.e., species, breeding variation, living conditions, effects of pathologies, etc.), biodeterioration, and aging, and the main concern in its analysis is its uniformity. The deterioration of parchment collagen produces a rather stiff or in some circumstances, a relaxed structure. Any intervention or treatment of unique, very precious cultural heritage artefacts must not negatively influence the properties of the component materials. Gamma irradiation is a relatively new technique of bioremediation. Data on the leather properties pre- and post-ionizing radiation bioremediation treatments are few in the literature. Fewer data are available on the historical leather and parchment physical chemical characteristics after ionizing gamma irradiation. This research had two main objectives: (i) the characterization of the parchment structure’s uniformity across the analyzed areas and its mechanical properties, i.e., tensile stress by mechanical tests and ATR-FTIR spectroscopy; and (ii) to establish parchment tolerance when exposed to ionizing gamma radiation as a pre-requisite for cultural heritage preservation irradiation treatment. It was found that the mechanical tests and ATR-FTIR spectroscopy may identify changes in the parchment’s irradiated structure and that the preservation of cultural heritage parchment artefacts may be performed at maximum 15 kGy gamma irradiation dose.

MacDonald, L., et al. (2013). Multispectral Imaging of Degraded Parchment. Computational Color Imaging, Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
	Multispectral imaging was employed to collect data on the degradation of an 18th century parchment by a series of physical and chemical treatments. Each sample was photographed before and after treatment by a monochrome digital camera with 21 narrow-band filters, with the objective of assessing algorithms for recovery of text from the images. A template-matching technique was used to detect the circular holes in each sample and a four-point projective transform to register the 21 images. Colour accuracy was verified by comparison of reconstructed spectra with measurements by spectrophotometer.

Malissa, A., et al. (2024). "Proteomics to Study Parchment Degradation – From Bulk to Spatial Analysis."
	
Manfredi, M. (2014). "Development and application of analytical and statistical techniques for the non-invasive monitoring and analysis of cultural heritage."
	
Manfredi, M., et al. (2015). "Quantitative multispectral imaging for the detection of parchment ageing caused by light: a comparison with ATR-FTIR, GC-MS and TGA analyses." International Journal of Conservation Science 6(1).
	
Mannucci, E., et al. (2000). "Recovery of ancient parchment: characterization by vibrational spectroscopy." Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 31(12): 1089-1097.
	
Marengo, E., et al. (2011). "Technique based on LED multispectral imaging and multivariate analysis for monitoring the conservation state of the Dead Sea Scrolls." Anal Chem 83(17): 6609-6618.
	The aim of this project is the development of a noninvasive technique based on LED multispectral imaging (MSI) for monitoring the conservation state of the Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS) collection. It is well-known that changes in the parchment reflectance drive the transition of the scrolls from legible to illegible. Capitalizing on this fact, we will use spectral imaging to detect changes in the reflectance before they become visible to the human eye. The technique uses multivariate analysis and statistical process control theory. The present study was carried out on a "sample" parchment of calfskin. The monitoring of the surface of a commercial modern parchment aged consecutively for 2 h and 6 h at 80 °C and 50% relative humidity (ASTM) was performed at the Imaging Lab of the Library of Congress (Washington, DC, U.S.A.). MSI is here carried out in the vis-NIR range limited to 1 μm, with a number of bands of 13 and bandwidths that range from about 10 nm in UV to 40 nm in IR. Results showed that we could detect and locate changing pixels, on the basis of reflectance changes, after only a few "hours" of aging.

Meghea, A., et al. (2003). Quantitative chromatic characterization of the patrimony issues obtained from leather and parchment.
	
Meghea, A., et al. (2004). "Behaviour to accelerate ageing of some natural biopolymer constituents of parchment." Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals 418(1): 285-290.
	
Melzer, L., et al. (2019). "Conservation of the 58th Battalion Book of Remembrance." AICCM Bulletin 40(1): 29-36.
	
Migliore, L., et al. (2020). May metagenomics disclose the hidden secrets of the ancient damaged parchments? Proceedings of the IMEKO TC4 International Conference on Metrology for Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, Online.
	
Migliore, L., et al. (2017). "Purple spot damage dynamics investigated by an integrated approach on a 1244 A.D. parchment roll from the Secret Vatican Archive." Scientific Reports 7(1): 9521.
	Ancient parchments are commonly attacked by microbes, producing purple spots and detachment of the superficial layer. Neither standard cultivation nor molecular methods (DGGE) solved the issue: causative agents and colonization model are still unknown. To identify the putative causal agents, we describe the 16 S rRNA gene analysis (454-pyrosequencing) of the microbial communities colonizing a damaged parchment roll dated 1244 A.D. (A.A. Arm. I-XVIII 3328, Vatican Secret Archives). The taxa in damaged or undamaged areas of the same document were different. In the purple spots, marine halotolerant Gammaproteobacteria, mainly Vibrio, were found; these microorganisms are rare or absent in the undamaged areas. Ubiquitous and environmental microorganisms were observed in samples from both damaged and undamaged areas. Pseudonocardiales were the most common, representing the main colonizers of undamaged areas. We hypothesize a successional model of biodeterioration, based on metagenomic data and spectroscopic analysis of pigments, which help to relate the damage to a microbial agent. Furthermore, a new method (Light Transmitted Analysis) was utilized to evaluate the kind and entity of the damage to native collagen. These data give a significant advance to the knowledge in the field and open new perspectives to remediation activity on a huge amount of ancient document.

Miu, L. (2010). Application of the Fluorescence technique for the investigation of parchment deterioration. International Conference on Advanced Materials and Systems.
	
Miu, L., et al. (2020). "Chromatic assessment of newly manufactured leather and parchment for museum purposes."
	
Miu, L., et al. (2008). "Study on the Romanian historical parchment by molecular spectroscopy techniques." UPB Sci Bull, Series B 70(4): 51-56.
	
Možir, A., et al. (2014). "Material properties of historic parchment: A reference collection survey." Studies in Conservation 59(3): 136-149.
	Historic parchment is a complex biological material, and due to various methods of production or inks used, unknown environmental histories of objects and heterogeneous nature of animal skin, it represents a particular analytical challenge. Due to the number of variables it is likely that patterns in degradation of these historic objects can only be revealed by surveying the material properties of a significant number of real objects. In this work, a sacrificial collection of ca. 100 historic parchments (fifteenth to twentieth century) was characterized using a range of techniques available to conservation practitioners that can usefully be used to reliably and rapidly characterize parchment. We focused on micro-destructive methods, such as shrinkage temperature (Ts), as the most widely used indicator of parchment degradation. Lipid content, roughness, and ink pH were additionally measured, while a limited number of samples containing iron gall ink were also examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and SEM-EDX, to explore the distribution of ink components. Even in the absence of detailed environmental histories, it is possible to acknowledge the significance of the effect of iron gall ink and its acidity, and of lipids on parchment degradation, as measured using Ts. This research reports valuable reference data, while the collection remains accessible for further research. © The International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works 2014.

Možir, A., et al. (2012). "A study of degradation of historic parchment using small-angle X-ray scattering, synchrotron-IR and multivariate data analysis." Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 402(4): 1559-1566.
	Parchment has been in use for thousands of years and has been used as the writing or drawing support for many important historic works. A variety of analytical techniques is currently used for routine assessment of the degree of denaturation of historic parchment; however, because parchment has a heterogeneous nature, analytical methods with high spatial resolution are desirable. In this work, the use of small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and synchrotron-IR (SR-IR) was examined in conjunction with multivariate data analysis to study degradation of an extended set of historic parchment samples, and particularly to investigate the effect of lipids and the presence of iron gall ink on the degradation processes. In the data analysis, shrinkage temperature, lipid content, sample age, presence of ink and accelerated degradation were included. The analysis of loading factors in partial least-squares regression and principal component analyses based on SAXS, SR-IR and other analytical and descriptive data reveals the effect of lipid removal on diffraction patterns, and lipids are found to cause the degradation process in parchment to accelerate. The effect of iron gall ink is also evident, although the mechanism of ageing is different to that of natural ageing in the absence of ink. In addition, a historic parchment score from ca. 1750 is examined, demonstrating the significant effect of iron gall ink, and lipids and inorganic soiling on its increased degradation.

Mühlen Axelsson, K., et al. (2012). "Dimensional studies of specific microscopic fibre structures in deteriorated parchment before and during shrinkage." Journal of Cultural Heritage 13(2): 128-136.
	This paper reports the first systematic study of the dimensions of morphological changed microscopic collagen fibres in historical and new reference parchments with the aim to improve the knowledge on deterioration and the diagnosis of their damage in connection with conservation activities. The dimensions of fibres from the parchments were measured before and during shrinkage, with special emphasis on fibres with degradation characteristics designated as " pearls on a string" and " butterflies" In addition, measurements of the total shrinkage of the length of fibres and pieces of parchment were also carried out. The observations support the assumption that in vivo transformation of the fibre structure by natural ageing is similar to that taking place when heating parchment and fibres in water. Based on statistical cluster analysis, four subpopulations of pearls representing different stages of deterioration are found. Moreover, the dimensional changes in the specific structures observed at room temperature can be related to specific temperatures in the interval of shrinkage suggesting that the hydrothermal stability of the fibres may be predicted on the basis of the ratio between length and width of the so-called pearls (Pl/Pw). The total shrinkage measured is drastic, in average around 56% for fibres and 43 to 48% for pieces of parchment depending on the direction of the skin. The total shrinkage of fibres corresponds to a mean change in the ratio Pl/Pw from around 10 to around 2.3. Finally, relations between the measured dimensions at the microscopic level with those of collagen at nanoscopic and molecular levels including known and potential chemical splitting points strongly indicate that the formation of the butterfly-like fragments formed by cleavage of two adjacent pearls in the fibre can be ascribed to chemical modification of specific tripeptides in the collagen molecule. © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS.

Odlyha, M., et al. (2014). Damage assessment of parchment at the collagen fibril level using atomic force microscopy and mechanical testing at the macro level.
	
Odlyha, M., et al. (2009). "Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopy (ATR/FTIR) and scanning probe microscopy of parchment." E-Preservation Science 6.
	
Odlyha, M., et al. (2007). Thermoanalytical (macro to nano-scale) techniques and non-invasive spectroscopic analysis for damage assessment of parchment.
	
Oliveira, R. d. C. S. (2017). The book of birds in Portuguese scriptoria: preservation and access, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa (Portugal).
	
Papanikolaou, A., et al. (2022). "Spatio-temporal monitoring of humidity induced 3D displacements and strains in mounted and unmounted parchments." Heritage Science 10(1): 15.
	The high hygroscopicity and heterogeneity of parchment make it particularly sensitive to changes in environmental conditions. The proper housing of a historical parchment, including mounting should mitigate the impact of the changes on the object. However, finding an appropriate mounting method requires detailed knowledge of the mechanical response of a parchment on the combined influence from environmental changes and forces introduced by the mounting. In this paper we present the capabilities of 3D digital image correlation (3D DIC) method implemented for full-field, spatio-temporal monitoring of displacements and strains in parchment exposed to environmental changes. We combine the measurement concept with the particular, critical task of evaluating the effectiveness of stabilising a single sheet of parchment mounted using elastic polyester strips. 3D DIC is implemented to record in non-invasive and non-contact way the full-field response of parchment mock-ups to fluctuations of the relative humidity (RH) without interfering with the climatic chamber processes. We measure and compare the impact of fluctuating RH on unmounted and mounted parchment samples, through the full-field 3D measurements of dimensional changes at selected humidity levels, and through the local and global analysis of the samples’ response (displacement/strains) in time. We had proven in quantitative and detailed way that the applied mount fully fulfils its task, namely reduce significantly the out-of-plane displacements and strains occurring in the parchment during RH changes in the range from 39 to 80%. Our study also demonstrates the possibilities of using 3D DIC for the efficient support of conservation scientists in the development of storage, mounting, and treatment protocols for historical parchment.

Pataki-Hundt, A. (2012). "Conservation treatment and stabilization of the ninth-century Stuttgart Psalter." Journal of the Institute of Conservation 35(2): 152-164.
	
Perini, N., et al. (2020). "The integration of metagenomics and chemical physical techniques biodecoded the buried traces of the biodeteriogens of parchment purple spots." Frontiers in Microbiology 11: 598945.
	
Perzolla, V. (2017). Investigation into the Nature and Degradation of Leather and Leather-related Materials within a Museum-based Context, University of Leeds.
	
Polacheck, I., et al. (1989). "Damage to an ancient parchment document by Aspergillus." Mycopathologia 106(2): 89-93.
	Damage to the Aleppo Codex (Halab), the earliest Hebrew Old Testament, has been found to have been caused by a member of the genus Aspergillus, rather than fire. The Codex was written on parchment in Tiberias in the tenth century A.D. After a period in Jerusalem and Egypt, it was transferred to a synagogue in Aleppo (Halab), Syria which was set on fire in 1947. It is now on permanent loan to the Israel Museum. The lower corners of all of the pages were found to be aubergine colored, brittle, and breaking away. Examination of fragments from the damaged areas with phase-contrast and fluorescence microscopy revealed the presence of septate, hyphalike filaments. However, similar filamentous structures were not observed in fragments from undamaged areas of the manuscript. The filaments in damaged regions were found with a specific fluorescent antobody stain to be Aspergillus hyphae.

Popescu, C., et al. (2008). "Assessment of collagen-based materials which are supports of cultural and historical objects." Polymer Degradation and Stability 93(5): 976-982.
	The thermal degradation of collagen-based materials, viz. collagen, recently manufactured parchments and tanned leathers, a heritage parchment and patrimonial (historical) leathers, was investigated by thermal analysis methods. With progressive heating, all these materials exhibit three main successive processes, associated with dehydration, protein denaturation and pyrolysis/oxidation. The analysis of both denaturation and thermo-oxidation revealed significant differences between aged leather, collagen, recently manufactured parchments and tanned leathers in terms of the number of overlapping processes (reflected in the number of peaks recorded at denaturation) and of the oxidative degradation rates, given by the normalised curves of differential thermal gravimetry (DTG). The various observations are proposed as qualitative indices for assessing the age and storage conditions of leather. A three-phase model was used for explaining the results. This consists of crystalline collagen filaments that are embedded in an amorphous matrix with an interface zone between the crystalline and amorphous regions. Solid-state 1H NMR investigations corroborate the thermal analysis results and enhance the understanding of the ageing processes.

Pronti, L., et al. (2018). "Characterization and Digital Restauration of XIV-XV Centuries Written Parchments by Means of Nondestructive Techniques: Three Case Studies."
	
Quandt, A. B. and R. C. Wolcott (2018). "The Codicology and Conservation of the Syriac Galen Palimpsest." Manuscript Studies: A Journal of the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript Studies 3(1): 33-68.
	
Rabel, C. (2018). "Des flammes à l’écran: Conservation, numérisation et étude 
des manuscrits sinistrés de Chartres." Conservation, numérisation et étude des manuscrits sinistrés de Chartres: 145-161.
	
Rabin, I. (2013). "Archaeometry of the Dead Sea Scrolls." Dead Sea Discoveries 20(1): 124-142.
	
Reid, Z. and B. van de Wetering (2012). "Conservation of the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Chancery pleadings at the National Archives of Ireland." Journal of the Institute of Conservation 35(2): 189-200.
	
Riccardi, A. (2010). "Parchment ageing study: new methods based on thermal transport and shrinkage analysis." E-Preservation Science.
	
Rickman, C., et al. (2012). "The conservation of botanical illustrations on vellum: past, present and future." Journal of the Institute of Conservation 35(2): 117-136.
	
Rigante, E. C. L., et al. (2023). "Spectroscopic and mass spectrometry-based in-situ investigation of a 17th-century handwritten academic diploma on illuminated parchment." Microchemical Journal 190: 108590.
	In 2008, more than 300 ancient scrolls, some of which were preciously illuminated, were recovered in Chicago (USA) after being stolen and illegally exported. These scrolls consisted of private and public documents, including papal and royal, dating from the 14th to the 19th century. The scrolls were returned to Italy and 42 of them, known as the Chicago Parchments, are now preserved at the State Archives of Bari (Italy). An illuminated academic diploma from the 17th century, known as doctoratus privilegium, was among them, and it was of particular interest to restorers and conservation scientists. To identify the pigments, painting binders, and animal skin origin of the parchment, non-invasive analyses were carried out on several points using portable X-ray fluorescence (XRF), µRaman, and fibre optic reflectance spectroscopy (FORS). Gold and silver decorations were confirmed by XRF, highlighting the significance of the document. A quasi-non-invasive sampling approach was used to analyze the painting binders by applying a trypsin-chymotrypsin enriched hydrogel for in situ digestion of the proteinaceous material. The extracted binders were successfully identified as bovine and rabbit glues by both matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization with time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-ToF-MS) and reversed-phase liquid chromatography with electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (RPLC-ESI-MS/MS). By using bottom-up proteomics, the sheep skin origin of thin parchment samples was established from very small fragments that were digested in solution with trypsin.

Robinet, L. (2016). Cartographier la dégradation des parchemins à l’échelle microscopique sans contact ni prélèvement. Paris.
	
Robinet, L., et al. (2017). The influence of manufacturing and alterations on skin-based artifacts as characterized by nonlinear optical microscopy. ICOM-CC 18th Triennial Conference 2017 Copenhagen.
	
Saitta, F., et al. (2023). "Thermal analysis on parchments II: Micro-DSC approach to assess and rank heat damages at a molecular level." Thermochimica Acta 724: 179490.
	A unique normalized damage index was assessed to rank parchment heat damage. Micro-DSC on minced parchment buffered suspensions reveals collagen molecular damage. Micro-DSC methodology is sensitive in revealing injuries deriving from mild heat stress. The assessment of heat damages by micro-DSC and DSC-TGA methods was compared. The defined damage index can be used for screening processes on historical parchments.

Sakr, A., et al. (2018). "Characterization of microbiota deteriorating specific coptic manuscripts, Coptic Museum, Egypt." International Journal of Research Studies in Biosciences (IJRSB) 6(9): 1-15.
	
Schmeltz, M., et al. (2021). "Noninvasive quantitative assessment of collagen degradation in parchments by polarization-resolved SHG microscopy." Science Advances 7(29): 1090-1106.
	Nondestructive and noninvasive investigation techniques are highly sought-after to establish the degradation state of historical parchments, which is up to now assessed by thermal techniques that are invasive and destructive. We show that advanced nonlinear optical (NLO) microscopy enables quantitative in situ mapping of parchment degradation at the micrometer scale. We introduce two parameters that are sensitive to different degradation stages: The ratio of two-photon excited fluorescence to second harmonic generation (SHG) signals probes severe degradation, while the anisotropy parameter extracted from polarization-resolved SHG measurements is sensitive to early degradation. This approach is first validated by comparing NLO quantitative parameters to thermal measurements on artificially altered contemporary parchments. We then analyze invaluable parchments from the Middle Ages and show that we can map their conservation state and assess the impact of a restoration process. NLO quantitative microscopy should therefore help to identify parchments most at risk and optimize restoration methods.

Schütz, R., et al. (2013). "Quantifying degradation of collagen in ancient manuscripts: the case of the Dead Sea Temple Scroll." Analyst 138: 5505-5840.
	Since their discovery in the late 1940s, the Dead Sea Scrolls, some 900 ancient Jewish texts, have never stopped attracting the attention of scholars and the broad public alike, because they were created towards the end of the Second Temple period and the "time of Christ". Most of the work on them has been dedicated to the information contained in the scrolls' text, leaving physical aspects of the writing materials unexamined. They are, however, crucial for both historical insight and preservation of the scrolls. Although scientific analysis requires handling, it is essential to establish the state of degradation of these valued documents. Polarized Raman Spectroscopy (PRS) is a powerful tool for obtaining information on both the composition and the level of disorder of molecular units. In this study, we developed a non-invasive and non-destructive methodology that allows a quantification of the disorder (that can be related to the degradation) of protein molecular units in collagen fibers. Not restricted to collagen, this method can be applied also to other protein-based fibrous materials such as ancient silk, wool or hair. We used PRS to quantify the degradation of the collagen fibers in a number of fragments of the Temple Scroll (11Q19a). We found that collagen fibers degrade heterogeneously, with the ones on the surface more degraded than those in the core.

Sommer, D. V. (2018). "Facts and myths about the Vineland map and its context."
	
Sommer, D. V. P. and R. Larsen (2016). "Detection of COL III in parchment by amino acid analysis." Amino Acids 48(1): 169-181.
	Cultural heritage parchments made from the reticular dermis of animals have been subject to studies of deterioration and conservation by amino acid analysis. The reticular dermis contains a varying mixture of collagen I and III (COL I and III). When dealing with the results of the amino acid analyses, till now the COL III content has not been taken into account. Based on the available amino acid sequences, we present a method for determining the amount of COL III in the reticular dermis of new and historical parchments calculated from the ratio of Ile/Val. We find COL III contents between 7 and 32 % in new parchments and between 0.2 and 40 % in the historical parchments. This is consistent with results in the literature. The varying content of COL III has a significant influence on the uncertainty of the amino acid analysis. Although we have not found a simple correlation between the COL III content and the degree of deterioration, our results show that this question must be taken into consideration in future studies of the chemical and physical deterioration of parchment measured by amino acid analysis and other analytical methods.

Stankiewicz, J. (1996). "The conservation of Hebrew manuscript No. 8° 2238 in the Jewish National and University Library, Jerusalem: an evaluation of the method."
	
Sterflinger, K. and F. Pinzari (2012). "The revenge of time: fungal deterioration of cultural heritage with particular reference to books, paper and parchment." Environmental microbiology 14(3): 559-566.
	Summary Hyphomycetous fungi – so called ‘mould’– are the most important agents of biodeterioration in museums, museums' storage rooms, in libraries, collections and restoration studios. Fungi are able to live at low water activities, they are perfectly adapted to indoor environments and thrive in microclimatic niches caused by condensation, lack of ventilation or water retention by hygroscopic materials. Fungi spoil valuable pieces of art aesthetically, mechanically, chemically and by degradation of organic components. Historical material made of paper and oil paintings with high amounts of organic binders are especially susceptible to fungal deterioration. In order to prevent fungal contamination or to treat already contaminated objects an integrated approach including climate control, material‐specific cleaning and application of carefully selected biocides is necessary.

Szçzepanowska, H. and E. W. FitzHugh (1999). "Fourteenth-century documents of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem: analysis of inks, parchment and seals." The Paper Conservator 23(1): 36-45.
	
Tang, S., et al. (2021). "Parchment characterization by multiphoton electron extraction spectrometry." Archaeometry.
	
Thobois, E. (2014). "The “Triumphal Procession Miniatures” of Emperor Maximilian I: Conservation, Restoration, Mounting, Exhibition Presentation and the Development of a Storage Concept." Restaurator. International Journal for the Preservation of Library and Archival Material 35(3-4).
	
Vadrucci, M., et al. (2019). "Parchment processing and analysis: Ionizing radiation treatment by the REX source and multidisciplinary approach characterization." Applied Radiation and Isotopes 149: 159-164.
	Library material, and thus parchment, is frequently subjected to bio-deterioration processes caused by microorganisms. Fungi and bacteria cause alterations in the parchment inducing, in some cases, even the partial detachments of the surface layer and the loss of any text present on it. An important contribution to disinfection of the cultural heritage artefacts is given by the use of ionizing radiation. In this work, a preliminary study on the applicability of X-ray radiation as treatment for bio-deterioration removal is proposed. The results on the microbial growth after different irradiation treatments are shown in order to detect the dose protocol for the bio-degradation removal. Furthermore, the evaluation of the irradiation effects on the parchment microstructure is presented in order to define the applicability of the method on parchment artefacts.

Vilde, V., et al. (2019). "Use of Polarised Light Microscopy to Improve Conservation of Parchment." Studies in Conservation 64(5): 284-297.
	
Vnouček, J. (2022). "Hole Repairs as Proof of a Specific Method of Manufacture of Late Antique Parchment." Restaurator. International Journal for the Preservation of Library and Archival Material 43(1-2): 93-110.
	
Vodopivec, J. (1995). "The Preservation and Protection of Medieval Parchment Charters in Slovenia." IADA Preprints 95.
	
Voronina, L., et al. (1980). "Disinfection and straightening of parchment damaged by microorganisms."
	
Wouters, J., et al. (1992). "The conservation of the Codex Eyckensis: The evolution of the project and the assessment of materials and adhesives for the repair of parchment." The Paper Conservator 16(1): 67-77.
	
Wouters, J., et al. (1996). The conservation of parchment manuscripts: two case studies. ICOM triennial meeting, James & James; London.
	
Yurdun, T., et al. (2013). Applying the Techniques on Materials I. Conservation Science for the Cultural Heritage: Applications of Instrumental Analysis. E. A. Varella. Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer Berlin Heidelberg: 163-246.
	The knowledge of the composition of the natural dye mixtures gives hints on appropriate procedures for restoration strategies. Identification of the dyes used, the establishment of their biological source, how they have been prepared, how these historical textiles were made, can provide important information. The dyestuffs used up to nineteenth century were either of plant (weld, madder, indigo, etc.) or animal origin (cochineal, shellfish, etc.) and belonged to various chemical types, such as flavonoids (yellow), anthraquinones (red) and indigoids (blue and violet). In this study microsamples (19) were examined from 11 Mevlana’s kaftans, dervishs’ dresses and dated from the thirteenth century. The objects belong to the collection of the Mevlana Museum in Konya, Turkey. The analysis of dyestuffs from historical object with microdestructive method as High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) with diode-array detector was performed. Historical samples (0.5–1 mg) were used as extracted with the HCl/methanol/water (2:1:1) extraction method. In this work, colour measurements of the cotton fabric samples dyed with indigotin and ellagic acid were performed by CIELab system.

Yusupova, M. V. (1980). "Conservation and Restoration of Manuscripts and Bindings on Parchment." Restaurator 4(1): 57-70.
	Conservation and Restoration of Manuscripts and Bindings on Parchment. This article contains short descriptions of the main damages of manuscripts and bindings on parchment. Literature dealing with problems of their conservation and restoration is analyzed. Reasons of increase in transparency of parchments, which is the result of removal of deformations and softening, are examined. The possibility of eliminating this fault is discussed. Materials for the effective removal of different soiling, the fixing of texts and elimation of mechanical damages of parchments are suggested. © 1980, Walter de Gruyter. All rights reserved.

Zanetti, M., et al. (2020). "La restauration des livres et documents endommagés par le feu." La revue de la BNU(21): 52-59.
	Les bâtiments abritant d’anciennes collections de livres et de documents sur papier ont de tout temps subi des incendies dont l’impact est souvent désastreux. C’est notamment le cas des bibliothèques et des archives « victimes » de conflits armés. Une grande partie du patrimoine écrit endommagé par les bombardements de la Seconde Guerre mondiale a ainsi été abandonnée à son triste sort, au point de ne plus pouvoir être consultée ni même manipulée. Au cours des dernières décennies, des protoco...

